Description of the problem

Capital controls which were imposed in 2015 during the financial crisis in Greece lead to 
a great change in the means and the methods of transactions which were most commonly used until 
that year. Up to 2015, the majority of the Greek people used to make payments mostly through cash or checks. 
After capital controls, it is observed that the Greek people tended towards automated transactions 
through ATMs, POS, and e-banking.

However, it is remarkable that despite the rapid growth of automated transactions in the Greek economy, 
there is a decrease in the number of Automated Transaction Machines (ATMs) since 2010 (Hellenic Bank 
Association, 2017). This could make sense, because we should take into account that in economic thought 
ATMs are considered as products which are used as a means of a process and every product’s life cycle is 
described generally by five subsequent stages (Wikipedia):
i)	development, 
ii)	entrance in the market, 
iii)	rapid growth in the number of its consumers or users, 
iv)	a maximum point of its capacity that is used in the market and 
v)	reduction in the number of the product’s consumers or users and the entrance of a new and more 
	effective product.
The above stages of a product’s life cycle are commonly represented graphically by sigmoid curves.

In this project, we classify the municipalities in the metropolitan area of the city of Athens by the method 
of k-means clustering depending on the ratio of the number of ATMs in each municipality over the population 
of each municipality as a criterion. The motivation to select this subject comes from the increased demand for 
automated transactions in Greece since 2015 and the simultaneous reduction in the network of ATMs. 
At this point, we have to comment that about 3 million people reside in the metropolitan area of Athens, 
which is equal to about the 1/3 of total population in Greece, and therefore, the network of ATM infrastructure 
in Athens is the greatest in the country.

The aim of the project is to provide information through its results which can be useful in strategy planning 
and decision making for the Bank of Greece, the European Central Bank (ECB), and domestic organizations 
operating in the banking sector with regard to their investments for automated transaction terminals 
and their cost minimization. 
